Ansible Q&A from Mediuum - https://muditmathur121.medium.com/ansible-interview-q-a-34333cee7c42

https://linuxhandbook.com/ansible-variables-facts-registers/

LinkedIN Ansible URL - https://media.licdn.com/dms/document/media/D4D1FAQF7nHKXtfbSLw/feedshare-document-pdf-analyzed/0/1714716448986?e=1715817600&v=beta&t=CDceltaOZTL3cw9mnfTVCcRaSTC1NcEBH6Voxj3Ktxo

Q - Push vs Pull ?
A - Pull mechanisam will have additional agent software.
  - In Pull there may not be change in configuration every time, chnage in configuration is very rare so wastage of data.
  - In Push additional agent is not required ansible server will push the configuration whenever new version updated.

Q - What are the ansible modules or collections you used ?
A - .ping:| .debug:| .yum:| .copy:| .service:| .user:| .command:| .shell:|

Q - what are Registers in Ansible?
A - Some tasks will not show any output when running playbook. ex: running commands on your managed nodes using the command,shell modules will not display any output. you can use Register to capture the output of a task and save it to a variable. you can use this elseware in a playbook also.

Q - What is Ansible ?
A - Ansible provides open-source automation that reduces complexity and runs everywhere. Using Ansible lets you automate virtually any task. Here are some common use cases for      Ansible:
      - Eliminate repetition and simplify workflows.
      - Manage and maintain system configuration.
      - Continuously deploy complex software.
      - Perform zero-downtime rolling updates.
    Ansible uses simple, human-readable scripts called playbooks to automate your tasks. You declare the desired state of a local or remote system in your playbook. Ansible ensures that the system remains in that state.

Q - What is inventory ?
A - Inventory is list of hosts your ansible server is managing. 

Q - What is Adhoc commands in Ansible ?
A - Ansible adhoc command is generallay command line option to do somthing in the ansible hosts in emergency cases.
A - Adhoc commands are emergency commands, if we want to login and perform action in server without login, we can use adhoc commands.
  - Ex: To install and start nginx without login to server.
    CMD: $ ansible -i inventory mongodb (name of the inventory) --become(execution access) -e ansible_user=centos -e ansible_password=DevOps321 -m ansible.builtin.yum -a "name=nginx state=installed"
    CMD: $ ansible -i inventory mongodb --become -e ansible_user=centos -e ansible_password=DevOps321 -m ansible.builtin.service -a "name=nginx state=started"
Q - What are playbooks ?
A - In playbook we keep all ansible modules/collections in a YAML file and run that file
Q - What is configuration Management?
A - 
Q - Do you think Ansible is better than other configuration management tools? If yes, Why?
A - Ansible is different from other configuration management tools and it is better in achiving a specific use case :
  - Lets assume ansible is agent less, if you want to configure 100s of VMs or any servers, you dont have to install any agnet when you are using ansible as a configuration management tool. other configuration tolls have like master slave architecture becaue of these you have to pre configure all of these VMs. But in ansible case you have to have a password less authentication between host that ansible installed and the other servers which which you want to configure with ansible.
Q - Can you write an asnible Playbook to install httpd service and get it running ?
A - 
Q - How Ansible helped your organization ?
A - We have 40 servers previously we used basic shell script to install some packages weather it be basic security patching as it is mandatory installation required by my organization, turning of firewall on all the VMs, and enabling strict rules. initially takes time to connect to VMs to inslall manually but once we adopted ansible we have reduced this time and ansible ws very effective and it saved lot of time previously it took 3 o 4 hours but now max in 30 min we can complete task.
Q - What is Ansible Dynamic Inventory ? (Scenario based Q)
A - Lets assume that you have VMs on AWS , Asssume developers are creating VMs on AWS, Admins are creating VMs on AWS and now we have configured Ansible to make some configuration on that VMs, lets assume you have 50 VMs and installed MYSQL ansible done it goot later point of time you realize that developers and admins are creating lot of more VMs how do you achive with ansible how do you check frequently what are the VMs add it it to the inventory no right.
 - For that Ansible support something called Dynamic Inventory so the concept of dynamic inventory is Ansible keeps looking at AWS account EC2 for what are the newly added VMs and Ansible would auto configure those VMs using the Ansible dynamic Inventory.
Q - What is Ansible Galaxy command and why it is used for ?
A - Ansible galaxy command creates structure 
Q - Can you explain me structure of Ansible Playbook using Roles ?
A - We use ansible galaxy command to create the structure and these are the different folders create by ansible galaxy command .It creates roles, defaults, handlers..
Q - What are handlers in Ansible and why are they used ?
A - handlers are similar to the normal task in ansible but the only run when a task contents a notify directive, basically its a way of calling when it is required.
Q - I would like to run a specific set of tasks only on windows vms and not Linux vms is it possible ?
A - We can use tags to achive this use case.
Q - Does ansible support parallel execution of tasks ?
A - Yes, Ansible support parallel execution, and it executes task by task on all required machines.
Q - What is the protocol that Ansible use to connect to windows VMs ?
A - Ansible uses winrm to connect to windows, and ssh to connect to linux.
Q - How do you handle secrets in Ansible ?
A - You can configure vault which support Hashicorp.
Q - Can you talk about a Ansible playbook that you wrote and how it helped your company ?
A - 
Q - What do you think that Ansible can improve ?
A - Ansible can improve by providing feature like verbocity like debug level for task basis.
  - Ansible can work on IDs plugins for auto populate.
Q - What are host vars and Groups vars ?
A - The host_vars folders contains YAML file that reference specific server.
  - The The group_vars contains YAML file that references group of servers or all servers.
Q - What are gathering facts?
A - You can retrive variables that contain information about your managed hosts. these variables called facts and Ansible uses the setup module to gather these facts. The IP address on one of your managed nodes is axample of a fact. we can also turn off the facts by setting gather_facts boolean to false in your play ex: gather_facts: false.
    example: ansible node1 -m setup
Q - What is stat in  ansible ?
A - state is module in ansible to check the statistics of the files and folders.
Q - Ansible roles?
A -  Ansible role is a proper directory structure to reuse the components





 



